The idea was to create a project that works to capture and analyze linguistic markers associated with the onset and persistence of depressive symptoms in order to build an algorithm that can effectively predict depression. To move forward the idea that linguistic markers in Tweets can be used to construct statistical models that can detect and even predict depression in ways that can complement and extend traditional approaches to diagnosis.
Building an algorithm that can analyze Tweets exhibiting self-assessed depressive features can make it possible for individuals, parents, caregivers, and medical professionals to analyze social media posts for linguistic clues that signal deteriorating mental health far before traditional approaches currently do. Analyzing linguistic markers in social media posts allows for a low-profile assessment that can compliment traditional services and would allow for a much earlier awareness of depressive signs.
While many previous studies of depression-related social media posts have relied on Facebook, fewer have focused on Twitter content. However, there are key differences between the two platforms that lead to uniquely different content, and Twitter content is uniquely valuable.
While Facebook users frequently post under their real names to friends and family members, Twitter users often use pseudonyms and are more likely to be connected with users they have never met. This allows for a more anonymous means of communication, which may provide a less biased account of an individual’s thoughts and experiences.
Twitter also provides a broad population of users who may not ordinarily be likely to participate in mental-health related research as well as a broad spectrum of publicly available information, offering a way to overcome some of the limitations of traditional methods of data collection.
Changes in language and activity have been consistently correlated with changes in activity on social media. Emotional language and linguistic features used in social media posts have been proven to indicate feelings that characterize major depression. People consistently use social media platforms like Twitter to share their thoughts and opinions in written form.
Posts on Twitter are particularly useful for analysis because they are most commonly made in the course of daily activities and happenings. This provides a rich and consistent means for capturing behavioral attributes that are relevant to an individual’s thinking, mood, socialization, communication, and activities.
Over the last few years, there has been growing interest in using social media as a tool for public health, ranging from identifying the spread of flu symptoms to building insights about diseases based on Twitter posts. However, research on using social media for analyzing behavioral health disorders is still in its infancy.
Park et al. (see below for references), found evidence that people post about their depression and even their treatment on social media. Eichstaedt, et al., found that Facebook language can predict depression in medical records. De Choudhury et al., examined linguistic and emotional correlates for postnatal changes of new mothers and built a statistical model to predict extreme postnatal behavioral changes using only prenatal observations. Reece, et al., developed computational models to predict the emergence of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Twitter users. This highlights the potential of social media as a source of signals about likelihood of current or future episodes of depression.
This project works to expand the scope of social media-based mental health measures and use existing research that has proven the correlation between depression and specific linguistic features in order to build an algorithm that can predict text-based signs of depression.
The use of linguistic markers as a tool in the analysis and diagnoses of depression has enormous potential. Depression can so quickly be seen in text, even without the use of complex models. Simply by collecting, cleaning, and processing available data, visual analysis alone can illuminate the difference between random Tweets and Tweets that have depressive characteristics.
Once the Tweets for this project were cleaned, it was easy to see the difference between the two datasets by creating a word cloud with the cleaned Tweets. The differences between the two datasets were clear.
